claude-plugins/manifest-dev/skills/define/define.md, before:

---
description: 'Manifest builder with verification criteria. Converts known requirements into Deliverables + Invariants. Use when you need done criteria, acceptance tests, quality gates—not for requirements discovery. Outputs executable manifest.'
user-invocable: true
---

# /define - Manifest Builder

## Goal

Build a **comprehensive Manifest** that captures:
- **What we build** (Deliverables with Acceptance Criteria)
- **How we'll get there** (Approach - validated direction)
- **Rules we must follow** (Global Invariants)

**Why thoroughness matters**: Every criterion discovered NOW is one fewer rejection during implementation/review. The goal is a deliverable that passes review on first submission—no "oh, I also needed X" after the work is done.

Comprehensive means surfacing **latent criteria**—requirements the user doesn't know they have until probed. Users know their surface-level needs; your job is to discover the constraints and edge cases they haven't thought about.

100% upfront is impossible—some criteria only emerge during implementation. Aim for high coverage. The manifest supports amendments for what's discovered later.

Output: `/tmp/manifest-{timestamp}.md`

## Input

`$ARGUMENTS` = task description, optionally with context/research

If no arguments provided, ask: "What would you like to build or change?"

## Task Classification

After parsing input, classify the deliverable type:

| Type | Indicators | Action |
|------|------------|--------|
| **Code** | Files, APIs, features, fixes, refactors, tests | Read `tasks/CODING.md` |
| **Document** | Specs, proposals, reports, formal docs | Read `tasks/DOCUMENT.md` |
| **Research** | Investigations, analyses, comparisons, competitive reviews | Read `tasks/RESEARCH.md` |
| **Blog** | Blog posts, articles, tutorials, newsletters | Read `tasks/BLOG.md` |
| **Other** | Doesn't fit above | Proceed with universal flow |

**Confirm with user**: "This appears to be a [TYPE] deliverable. Correct?" If user indicates a different type or "none of these", adjust accordingly.

**If task file exists**: Read it and incorporate domain-specific guidance into the interview.

**If no task file applies**: Proceed with universal flow—the core principles and manifest schema work for any deliverable.

## Principles

1. **Verifiable** - Every Invariant and AC has a verification method (bash, subagent, manual). Constraints that can't be verified from output go in Process Guidance.

2. **Validated** - You drive the interview. Generate concrete candidates; learn from user reactions.

3. **Domain-grounded** - Before probing for criteria, understand the domain: explore existing materials for patterns/constraints, research unfamiliar domains, ask for context. Latent criteria emerge from domain understanding—you can't surface what you don't know.

4. **Complete** - Surface hidden requirements through outside view (what typically fails in similar projects?), pre-mortem (what could go wrong?), and non-obvious probing (what hasn't user considered?).

5. **Directed** - For complex tasks, establish validated implementation direction (Approach) before execution. Architecture defines direction, not step-by-step script. Trade-offs enable autonomous adjustment.

6. **Efficient** - Every question must pass a quality gate: it **materially changes the manifest**, **locks an assumption**, or **chooses between meaningful trade-offs**. If a question fails all three, don't ask it. One missed criterion costs more than one extra question—err toward asking, but never ask trivia. Prioritize questions that split the space—scope and constraints before details.

## Constraints

**Discoverable unknowns — search first** - Facts about the project (existing structure, patterns, conventions, prior decisions) are discoverable. Exhaust exploration before asking the user. Only ask about discoverable facts when: multiple plausible candidates exist, searches yield nothing but the fact is needed, or the ambiguity is actually about intent not fact. When asking, present what you found and recommend one option.

**Preference unknowns — ask early** - Trade-offs, priorities, scope decisions, and style preferences cannot be discovered through exploration. Ask these directly. Provide concrete options with a recommended default. If genuinely low-impact and the user signals "enough", proceed with the recommended default and record as a Known Assumption in the manifest.

**Mark a recommended option** - Every question with options must include a recommended default. For single-select, mark exactly one "(Recommended)". For multi-select, mark sensible defaults or none if all equally valid. Reduces cognitive load — users accept, reject, or adjust rather than evaluating from scratch. AskUserQuestion supports max 4 options per question.

**Confirm before encoding** - When you discover constraints from exploration (structural patterns, conventions, existing boundaries), present them to the user before encoding as invariants. "I found X—should this be a hard constraint?" Discovered ≠ confirmed.

**Encode explicit constraints** - When users state preferences, requirements, or constraints (not clarifying remarks or exploratory responses), these must map to an INV or AC. "Single-author writing only" → process invariant. "Target < 1500 words" → acceptance criterion. Don't let explicit constraints get lost in the interview log.

**Probe for approach constraints** - Beyond WHAT to build, ask HOW it should be done. Tools to use or avoid? Methods required or forbidden? Automation vs manual? These become process invariants.

**Probe input artifacts** - When input references external documents (file paths, URLs), ask: "Should [document] be a verification source?" If yes, encode as Global Invariant.

**Log after every action** - Write to `/tmp/define-discovery-{timestamp}.md` immediately after each discovery (domain findings, interview answers, exploration insights). Goal: another agent reading only the log could resume the interview. Read full log before synthesis.

**Confirm understanding periodically** - Before transitioning to a new topic area or after resolving a cluster of related questions, synthesize your current understanding back to the user: "Here's what I've established so far: [summary]. Correct?" This catches interpretation drift early—a misunderstanding in round 2 compounds through round 8 if never checked.

**Batch related questions** - Group related questions into a single turn rather than asking one at a time. Batching keeps momentum and reduces round-trips without sacrificing depth. Each batch should cover a coherent topic area—don't mix unrelated concerns in one batch.

**Stop when converged** - Err on more probing. Convergence requires: pre-mortem checked, domain understood, edge cases probed, and no obvious areas left unexplored. Only then, if very confident further questions would yield nothing new, move to synthesis. Remaining low-impact unknowns that don't warrant further probing are recorded as Known Assumptions in the manifest. User can signal "enough" to override.

**Verify before finalizing** - After writing manifest, verify completeness using the manifest-verifier agent with the manifest and discovery log as input. If status is CONTINUE, ask the outputted questions, log new answers, update manifest, re-verify. Loop until COMPLETE or user signals "enough".

**Insights become criteria** - Outside view findings, pre-mortem risks, non-obvious discoveries → convert to INV-G* or AC-*. Don't include insights that aren't encoded as criteria.

**Automate verification** - Use automated methods (commands, subagent review). When using general-purpose subagent, default to opus model. When a criterion seems to require manual verification, probe the user: suggest how it could be made automatable, or ask if they have ideas. Manual only as a last resort or when the user explicitly requests it.

## Approach Section (Complex Tasks)

After defining deliverables, probe for implementation direction. Skip for simple tasks with obvious approach.

**Architecture** - Generate concrete options based on existing patterns. "Given the intent, here are approaches: [A], [B], [C]. Which fits best?" Architecture is direction (structure, patterns, flow), not step-by-step script.

**Execution Order** - Propose order based on dependencies. "Suggested order: D1 → D2 → D3. Rationale: [X]. Adjust?" Include why (dependencies, risk reduction, etc.).

**Risk Areas** - Pre-mortem outputs. "What could cause this to fail? Candidates: [R1], [R2], [R3]." Each risk has detection criteria. Not exhaustive—focus on likely/high-impact.

**Trade-offs** - Decision criteria for competing concerns. "When facing [tension], priority? [A] vs [B]?" Format: `[T-N] A vs B → Prefer A because X`. Enables autonomous adjustment during /do.

**When to include Approach**: Multi-deliverable tasks, unfamiliar domains, architectural decisions, high-risk implementations. The interview naturally reveals if it's needed.

**Architecture vs Process Guidance**: Architecture = structural decisions (components, patterns, structure). Process Guidance = methodology constraints (tools, manual vs automated). "Add executive summary section covering X, Y, Z" is Architecture. "No bullet points in summary sections" is Process Guidance.

## What the Manifest Needs

Three categories, each covering **output** or **process**:

- **Global Invariants** - "Don't do X" (negative constraints, ongoing, verifiable). Output: "No breaking changes to public API." Process: "Don't edit files in /legacy."
- **Process Guidance** - Non-verifiable constraints on HOW to work. Approach requirements, methodology, tool preferences that cannot be checked from the output alone (e.g., "manual optimization only" - you can't tell from the output whether it was manually crafted or generated). These guide the implementer but aren't gates.
- **Deliverables + ACs** - "Must have done X" (positive milestones). Three types:
  - *Functional*: "Section X explains concept Y"
  - *Non-Functional*: "Document under 2000 words", "All sections follow template structure"
  - *Process*: "Deliverable contains section 'Executive Summary'"

## The Manifest Schema

````markdown
# Definition: [Title]

## 1. Intent & Context
- **Goal:** [High-level purpose]
- **Mental Model:** [Key concepts to understand]

## 2. Approach (Complex Tasks Only)
*Validated implementation direction. Omit for simple tasks.*

- **Architecture:** [High-level HOW - validated direction, not step-by-step]

- **Execution Order:**
  - D1 → D2 → D3
  - Rationale: [why this order - dependencies, risk reduction, etc.]

- **Risk Areas:**
  - [R-1] [What could go wrong] | Detect: [how you'd know]
  - [R-2] [What could go wrong] | Detect: [how you'd know]

- **Trade-offs:**
  - [T-1] [Priority A] vs [Priority B] → Prefer [A] because [reason]
  - [T-2] [Priority X] vs [Priority Y] → Prefer [Y] because [reason]

## 3. Global Invariants (The Constitution)
*Rules that apply to the ENTIRE execution. If these fail, the task fails.*

- [INV-G1] Description: ... | Verify: [Method]
  ```yaml
  verify:
    method: bash | codebase | subagent | research | manual
    command: "[if bash]"
    agent: "[if subagent]"
    model: "[if subagent, default opus for general-purpose]"
    prompt: "[if subagent or research]"
  ```

## 4. Process Guidance (Non-Verifiable)
*Constraints on HOW to work. Not gates—guidance for the implementer.*

- [PG-1] Description: ...

## 5. Known Assumptions
*Low-impact items where a reasonable default was chosen without explicit user confirmation. If any assumption is wrong, amend the manifest.*

- [ASM-1] [What was assumed] | Default: [chosen value] | Impact if wrong: [consequence]

## 6. Deliverables (The Work)
*Ordered by execution order from Approach, or by dependency then importance.*

### Deliverable 1: [Name]

**Acceptance Criteria:**
- [AC-1.1] Description: ... | Verify: ...
  ```yaml
  verify:
    method: bash | codebase | subagent | research | manual
    [details]
  ```

### Deliverable 2: [Name]
...
````

## ID Scheme

| Type | Format | Example | Used By |
|------|--------|---------|---------|
| Global Invariant | INV-G{N} | INV-G1, INV-G2 | /verify (verified) |
| Process Guidance | PG-{N} | PG-1, PG-2 | /do (followed) |
| Risk Area | R-{N} | R-1, R-2 | /do (watched) |
| Trade-off | T-{N} | T-1, T-2 | /do (consulted) |
| Known Assumption | ASM-{N} | ASM-1, ASM-2 | /verify (audited) |
| Acceptance Criteria | AC-{D}.{N} | AC-1.1, AC-2.3 | /verify (verified) |

## Amendment Protocol

Manifests support amendments during execution:
- Reference original ID: "INV-G1.1 amends INV-G1"
- Track in manifest: `## Amendments`

## Complete

```text
Manifest complete: /tmp/manifest-{timestamp}.md

To execute: /do /tmp/manifest-{timestamp}.md
```

Commit message:

Add existing manifest feedback handling to /define skill (#7)

claude-plugins/manifest-dev/skills/define/define.md, after:

---
description: 'Manifest builder with verification criteria. Converts known requirements into Deliverables + Invariants. Use when you need done criteria, acceptance tests, quality gates—not for requirements discovery. Outputs executable manifest.'
user-invocable: true
---

# /define - Manifest Builder

## Goal

Build a **comprehensive Manifest** that captures:
- **What we build** (Deliverables with Acceptance Criteria)
- **How we'll get there** (Approach - validated direction)
- **Rules we must follow** (Global Invariants)

**Why thoroughness matters**: Every criterion discovered NOW is one fewer rejection during implementation/review. The goal is a deliverable that passes review on first submission—no "oh, I also needed X" after the work is done.

Comprehensive means surfacing **latent criteria**—requirements the user doesn't know they have until probed. Users know their surface-level needs; your job is to discover the constraints and edge cases they haven't thought about.

100% upfront is impossible—some criteria only emerge during implementation. Aim for high coverage. The manifest supports amendments for what's discovered later.

Output: `/tmp/manifest-{timestamp}.md`

## Input

`$ARGUMENTS` = task description, optionally with context/research

If no arguments provided, ask: "What would you like to build or change?"

## Existing Manifest Feedback

If input references a previous manifest: **treat it as source of truth**. It contains validated decisions — default to building on it, preserving what's settled. Confirm approach with user if unclear.

## Task Classification

After parsing input, classify the deliverable type:

| Type | Indicators | Action |
|------|------------|--------|
| **Code** | Files, APIs, features, fixes, refactors, tests | Read `tasks/CODING.md` |
| **Document** | Specs, proposals, reports, formal docs | Read `tasks/DOCUMENT.md` |
| **Research** | Investigations, analyses, comparisons, competitive reviews | Read `tasks/RESEARCH.md` |
| **Blog** | Blog posts, articles, tutorials, newsletters | Read `tasks/BLOG.md` |
| **Other** | Doesn't fit above | Proceed with universal flow |

**Confirm with user**: "This appears to be a [TYPE] deliverable. Correct?" If user indicates a different type or "none of these", adjust accordingly.

**If task file exists**: Read it and incorporate domain-specific guidance into the interview.

**If no task file applies**: Proceed with universal flow—the core principles and manifest schema work for any deliverable.

## Principles

1. **Verifiable** - Every Invariant and AC has a verification method (bash, subagent, manual). Constraints that can't be verified from output go in Process Guidance.

2. **Validated** - You drive the interview. Generate concrete candidates; learn from user reactions.

3. **Domain-grounded** - Before probing for criteria, understand the domain: explore existing materials for patterns/constraints, research unfamiliar domains, ask for context. Latent criteria emerge from domain understanding—you can't surface what you don't know.

4. **Complete** - Surface hidden requirements through outside view (what typically fails in similar projects?), pre-mortem (what could go wrong?), and non-obvious probing (what hasn't user considered?).

5. **Directed** - For complex tasks, establish validated implementation direction (Approach) before execution. Architecture defines direction, not step-by-step script. Trade-offs enable autonomous adjustment.

6. **Efficient** - Every question must pass a quality gate: it **materially changes the manifest**, **locks an assumption**, or **chooses between meaningful trade-offs**. If a question fails all three, don't ask it. One missed criterion costs more than one extra question—err toward asking, but never ask trivia. Prioritize questions that split the space—scope and constraints before details.

## Constraints

**Discoverable unknowns — search first** - Facts about the project (existing structure, patterns, conventions, prior decisions) are discoverable. Exhaust exploration before asking the user. Only ask about discoverable facts when: multiple plausible candidates exist, searches yield nothing but the fact is needed, or the ambiguity is actually about intent not fact. When asking, present what you found and recommend one option.

**Preference unknowns — ask early** - Trade-offs, priorities, scope decisions, and style preferences cannot be discovered through exploration. Ask these directly. Provide concrete options with a recommended default. If genuinely low-impact and the user signals "enough", proceed with the recommended default and record as a Known Assumption in the manifest.

**Mark a recommended option** - Every question with options must include a recommended default. For single-select, mark exactly one "(Recommended)". For multi-select, mark sensible defaults or none if all equally valid. Reduces cognitive load — users accept, reject, or adjust rather than evaluating from scratch. AskUserQuestion supports max 4 options per question.

**Confirm before encoding** - When you discover constraints from exploration (structural patterns, conventions, existing boundaries), present them to the user before encoding as invariants. "I found X—should this be a hard constraint?" Discovered ≠ confirmed.

**Encode explicit constraints** - When users state preferences, requirements, or constraints (not clarifying remarks or exploratory responses), these must map to an INV or AC. "Single-author writing only" → process invariant. "Target < 1500 words" → acceptance criterion. Don't let explicit constraints get lost in the interview log.

**Probe for approach constraints** - Beyond WHAT to build, ask HOW it should be done. Tools to use or avoid? Methods required or forbidden? Automation vs manual? These become process invariants.

**Probe input artifacts** - When input references external documents (file paths, URLs), ask: "Should [document] be a verification source?" If yes, encode as Global Invariant.

**Log after every action** - Write to `/tmp/define-discovery-{timestamp}.md` immediately after each discovery (domain findings, interview answers, exploration insights). Goal: another agent reading only the log could resume the interview. Read full log before synthesis.

**Confirm understanding periodically** - Before transitioning to a new topic area or after resolving a cluster of related questions, synthesize your current understanding back to the user: "Here's what I've established so far: [summary]. Correct?" This catches interpretation drift early—a misunderstanding in round 2 compounds through round 8 if never checked.

**Batch related questions** - Group related questions into a single turn rather than asking one at a time. Batching keeps momentum and reduces round-trips without sacrificing depth. Each batch should cover a coherent topic area—don't mix unrelated concerns in one batch.

**Stop when converged** - Err on more probing. Convergence requires: pre-mortem checked, domain understood, edge cases probed, and no obvious areas left unexplored. Only then, if very confident further questions would yield nothing new, move to synthesis. Remaining low-impact unknowns that don't warrant further probing are recorded as Known Assumptions in the manifest. User can signal "enough" to override.

**Verify before finalizing** - After writing manifest, verify completeness using the manifest-verifier agent with the manifest and discovery log as input. If status is CONTINUE, ask the outputted questions, log new answers, update manifest, re-verify. Loop until COMPLETE or user signals "enough".

**Insights become criteria** - Outside view findings, pre-mortem risks, non-obvious discoveries → convert to INV-G* or AC-*. Don't include insights that aren't encoded as criteria.

**Automate verification** - Use automated methods (commands, subagent review). When using general-purpose subagent, default to opus model. When a criterion seems to require manual verification, probe the user: suggest how it could be made automatable, or ask if they have ideas. Manual only as a last resort or when the user explicitly requests it.

## Approach Section (Complex Tasks)

After defining deliverables, probe for implementation direction. Skip for simple tasks with obvious approach.

**Architecture** - Generate concrete options based on existing patterns. "Given the intent, here are approaches: [A], [B], [C]. Which fits best?" Architecture is direction (structure, patterns, flow), not step-by-step script.

**Execution Order** - Propose order based on dependencies. "Suggested order: D1 → D2 → D3. Rationale: [X]. Adjust?" Include why (dependencies, risk reduction, etc.).

**Risk Areas** - Pre-mortem outputs. "What could cause this to fail? Candidates: [R1], [R2], [R3]." Each risk has detection criteria. Not exhaustive—focus on likely/high-impact.

**Trade-offs** - Decision criteria for competing concerns. "When facing [tension], priority? [A] vs [B]?" Format: `[T-N] A vs B → Prefer A because X`. Enables autonomous adjustment during /do.

**When to include Approach**: Multi-deliverable tasks, unfamiliar domains, architectural decisions, high-risk implementations. The interview naturally reveals if it's needed.

**Architecture vs Process Guidance**: Architecture = structural decisions (components, patterns, structure). Process Guidance = methodology constraints (tools, manual vs automated). "Add executive summary section covering X, Y, Z" is Architecture. "No bullet points in summary sections" is Process Guidance.

## What the Manifest Needs

Three categories, each covering **output** or **process**:

- **Global Invariants** - "Don't do X" (negative constraints, ongoing, verifiable). Output: "No breaking changes to public API." Process: "Don't edit files in /legacy."
- **Process Guidance** - Non-verifiable constraints on HOW to work. Approach requirements, methodology, tool preferences that cannot be checked from the output alone (e.g., "manual optimization only" - you can't tell from the output whether it was manually crafted or generated). These guide the implementer but aren't gates.
- **Deliverables + ACs** - "Must have done X" (positive milestones). Three types:
  - *Functional*: "Section X explains concept Y"
  - *Non-Functional*: "Document under 2000 words", "All sections follow template structure"
  - *Process*: "Deliverable contains section 'Executive Summary'"

## The Manifest Schema

````markdown
# Definition: [Title]

## 1. Intent & Context
- **Goal:** [High-level purpose]
- **Mental Model:** [Key concepts to understand]

## 2. Approach (Complex Tasks Only)
*Validated implementation direction. Omit for simple tasks.*

- **Architecture:** [High-level HOW - validated direction, not step-by-step]

- **Execution Order:**
  - D1 → D2 → D3
  - Rationale: [why this order - dependencies, risk reduction, etc.]

- **Risk Areas:**
  - [R-1] [What could go wrong] | Detect: [how you'd know]
  - [R-2] [What could go wrong] | Detect: [how you'd know]

- **Trade-offs:**
  - [T-1] [Priority A] vs [Priority B] → Prefer [A] because [reason]
  - [T-2] [Priority X] vs [Priority Y] → Prefer [Y] because [reason]

## 3. Global Invariants (The Constitution)
*Rules that apply to the ENTIRE execution. If these fail, the task fails.*

- [INV-G1] Description: ... | Verify: [Method]
  ```yaml
  verify:
    method: bash | codebase | subagent | research | manual
    command: "[if bash]"
    agent: "[if subagent]"
    model: "[if subagent, default opus for general-purpose]"
    prompt: "[if subagent or research]"
  ```

## 4. Process Guidance (Non-Verifiable)
*Constraints on HOW to work. Not gates—guidance for the implementer.*

- [PG-1] Description: ...

## 5. Known Assumptions
*Low-impact items where a reasonable default was chosen without explicit user confirmation. If any assumption is wrong, amend the manifest.*

- [ASM-1] [What was assumed] | Default: [chosen value] | Impact if wrong: [consequence]

## 6. Deliverables (The Work)
*Ordered by execution order from Approach, or by dependency then importance.*

### Deliverable 1: [Name]

**Acceptance Criteria:**
- [AC-1.1] Description: ... | Verify: ...
  ```yaml
  verify:
    method: bash | codebase | subagent | research | manual
    [details]
  ```

### Deliverable 2: [Name]
...
````

## ID Scheme

| Type | Format | Example | Used By |
|------|--------|---------|---------|
| Global Invariant | INV-G{N} | INV-G1, INV-G2 | /verify (verified) |
| Process Guidance | PG-{N} | PG-1, PG-2 | /do (followed) |
| Risk Area | R-{N} | R-1, R-2 | /do (watched) |
| Trade-off | T-{N} | T-1, T-2 | /do (consulted) |
| Known Assumption | ASM-{N} | ASM-1, ASM-2 | /verify (audited) |
| Acceptance Criteria | AC-{D}.{N} | AC-1.1, AC-2.3 | /verify (verified) |

## Amendment Protocol

Manifests support amendments during execution:
- Reference original ID: "INV-G1.1 amends INV-G1"
- Track in manifest: `## Amendments`

## Complete

```text
Manifest complete: /tmp/manifest-{timestamp}.md

To execute: /do /tmp/manifest-{timestamp}.md
```
